Big Banks Are Spinning Market Chaos Into Gold

Jittery markets are swelling trading revenue and profit, prompting banks to put more money to work on Wall Street

Second-quarter market upheaval was about tariff policies. Third-quarter volatility might be about President Trump and the Federal Reserve.
Bankers are generally against moves that call into question the independence of the central bank. Yet in the meantime the biggest U.S. banks at least stand to profit from investors’ anxiety, via their Wall Street trading desks.
These operations have kicked into high gear, providing a gusher of revenue and profit for big banks that reported second-quarter results this week, including JPMorgan Chase and Goldman Sachs. And a closer look suggests this could continue into future quarters, too.
Markets are helping out trading desks by giving nervy clients plenty of reasons to trade. And many banks are allocating more of their capital to trading right now. 
Trading desks can make more money in a few ways. One is by adding market risk. That is hard to do in the modern era, with the Volcker rule barring proprietary trading, and annual stress tests penalizing banks for such exposures.
Another way, though, is by increasing the volume of activity and by providing more financing to clients. That might not add more price risk. But it does consume resources on banks’ balance sheets, like capital.
These days, however, many banks have capital to burn. For some big banks, the recent round of stress tests resulted in a swell of capital in excess of the minimum they are required to keep to meet government rules.
Further relief might be on the way, particularly when it comes to trading in government bonds. Regulators are seeking comment on whether to exclude some Treasurys holdings from calculations of banks’ leverage levels, which means banks can, in theory, hold more of these on their trading books with the same amount of capital.
What exactly fuels improved trading results is important because revenue bolstered by more resources is likely more sustainable. And this might boost banks’ share-price valuations over time. Investors have tended to discount profit from trading activity because historically it has been so volatile.
Consider JPMorgan Chase, whose trading revenue was $8.9 billion in the second quarter, up 15% year over year. “While the revenues have gone up a lot, the resource usage has also gone up a lot,” JPMorgan Chief Financial Officer Jeremy Barnum told analysts this week.
Bank of America, likewise, has increased the capital allocated to its global markets segment to $49 billion as of the second quarter from $45.5 billion a year earlier.
Money isn’t free, of course. Capital going into one business can come out of another. Or it reduces the amount that can be returned to shareholders, as in stock buybacks. And while trading Treasurys might not raise banks’ leverage in the future, it can have other consequences, such as a reduction in return on assets.
Bank of America decided to give the global markets unit “more capital and capacity to grow, and they’ve used that wisely,” Chief Executive Brian Moynihan told analysts this week. “But if you look across our businesses, that’s the lowest return on allocated capital.”
What that means is that future declines in trading revenue might be a sign that banks have found more-profitable ways of deploying their resources. That might include lending more to businesses if and when those clients get more policy certainty.
For big banks these days, it is looking like a heads-they-win, tails-they-win scenario.
